English alphabet character voice-frequency encoder and decoder system
 
 




Submitted to: Dr. Abualseoud Hanani
Department of Electrical and Computer Engineering 
Birzeit University

Group members:                    Basel Salman, 1182377            Mohammad Qashoo,  1183336      Hasan Rimawi, 1183268


 
 
Abstract— This project aims to design, implement and evaluate English alphabet character voice-frequency encoder and decoder systems by using many DSP techniques, such as Fourier transform and filters.
I.	INTRODUCTION 
Digital Signal Processing (DSP) is the processing of the real-word signals such as voice, audio, video, temperature pressure… etc., in the form of digital signal. Processing of these signals include performing several operations on them like “add”, “subtract”, “multiply” and many other operations.
The digital processing of a real-word signal includes digitalizing the signal (converting it to digital form). This can be done using an analog to digital converter (A/D). When applying this conversion, the signal turns into 1, 0 signal to be processed in computers. The digital signal processing then takes a place in processing these digitalized signals. After processing the digitalized signal by DSP systems, an analog signal can be then reconstructed using a digital to analog converter (D/A) so it can be ready for the world use.
A programmer can use many platforms to deal with/design/etc. digital signal processing systems. MATLAB is one of these platforms. “MATLAB is a programming platform designed specifically for engineers and scientists. The heart of MATLAB is the MATLAB language, a matrix-based language allowing the most natural expression of computational mathematics”. [1]
The existence of platforms such as MATLAB and the DSP being programmable have led to the use of DSP in many different applications. Moreover, some applications are purely built using concepts of DSP. This project is such a DSP application that made on MATLAB using the basic concepts of DSP such as filters, Fourier Transform. 
In computers, encoding is the process of putting a sequence of characters (letters, numbers, punctuation, and certain symbols) into a specialized format for efficient transmission or storage. Decoding is the opposite process -- the conversion of an encoded format back into the original sequence of characters.
The aim of this project is to perform encoding operations of an input and re-decoding it to obtain the same input, and all in order to enable sounds to work in different environments. This project is used in many everyday applications that ease human life, for example: Google translate, Siri and many automated systems.
II.	PROBLEM SPECIFICATION
     The main idea of this project in its first part is to convert a specific message into an audio (.wav) file using techniques and functions of  DSP, in order to represent each character by a vector of four voice-band frequency components.  
    The second part of this project, we need to make an encoder for (.wav) file which was taken from the first section and thus get the same message that was entered. Two methods were used in this part: Fourier transform and filters system.
The two methods used in the second part : Fourier Transform and Filter Bank are not the ideal methods to build a high accurate model, error percentage is relatively high and caused by several factors as alignment where not all speakers of the voices starts at the same time, also the shortage of training data and the outlier existence where many accent with different pronunciation caused a misrepresentation, also noticing some noise that surrounds the speaker that cannot be humanly heard but causes  different power ranges then supposed to be.
III.	DATA
Input of the encoder is a message consisting of words (letters). This message is analyzed to obtain an audio file that expresses this message, the audio file is sent to the output of the encoder. On the other hand, the input of the decoder is an audio file which was generated by the encoder previously, thus recognizing these audio file’s sounds and representing them in the form of letters and words.
IV.	EVALUATION CRITERIA
The evaluation of the project is mainly based on the accuracy of the result. The accuracy of the results of our project has developed through working on the project. The first results were with accuracy less than required. Then, after working more on the project and studying more MATLAB and DSP techniques, the results were improved to give better accuracy. The results were also developed to be better by adding more features to the project.
	Staging in methods even make results more accurate through working, at the end of work on the project, the results were so satisfying comparing to the results obtained at earlier stages of working on the project.
V.	APPROACH
	The model was built in three different methods that vary in accuracy, efficiency and structure simplicity.
	The sample frequency was set to 8000 Hz (samples/sec), that is the number of samples taken were 8000 per second, and since the duration of each character was considered to be 40 milliseconds, the number of samples to represent each character is (8000 samples/second) * (40/1000 second) = 320 samples.
	In the first part, three arrays were made for low, middle and high frequencies to represent the frequencies for each alphabet character, in addition to an array to put the alphabet characters in, then the entered string was analyzed character by character and each character was checked whether it was upper-case or lower-case to select the suitable frequency (200 for upper and 100 for lower), then the location of that character was found in the character array and its index was marked and all low, middle and high frequencies in that index were taken to form a new signal that represents this character and this signal was appended to the overall signal that will represent at last the encoded string and an audio wave file of that string was generated. Also, a sound that expresses that encoded string was generated that can be heard.
	In the second part, the two methods were used in the decoding process. The user enters the name of the wave file, error detections on the name of the wave file were applied, the program keeps asking to enter a name of a wave file until the user enters a valid and existed one whether he enters the (.wav) extension or not. 
	First method is the Fourier Transform, the input signal from the wave file was divided into 40 milliseconds segments by taking every each 320 samples together, then Fourier Transform was applied on this partial-signal to convert it from time-domain to frequency-domain using fft() function, and since the spectrum is symmetric at the mid-point, only the first-half samples were taken (not exactly the half, around 165 samples), and findpeaks() function was applied on the spectrum to get the highest four frequencies and these frequencies were stored in a new four-index array, since we have taken 165 samples, these frequencies were multiplied by 4125 and divided by 165, then the frequencies were sorted in increasing order. The frequencies obtained are rounded to the closest previous hundred since they have an error that less-than 100 is added to them. For example, frequency 200 that indicates that the character is capital-letter, it was actually 225 so it’s rounded to 200 and so on. Since the frequencies got sorted, there are some cases where they are sorted in unwanted order, so when the character is detected, it won’t be the desired one so their positions are replaced. The two cases are shown in the following figure.
 
Figure 1: The cases that may get detected wrong in Fourier Transform
     Now, all frequencies have the desired values and order, they are just checked in the same low, middle and high arrays used in the Encoder to get the index of the character. After that, the character is appended to the overall string that represents the decoded signal which is printed out on the screen. 
	The second method of decoding is Filtering. 11 filters were designed for each frequency using fir1() function that has the parameters: the order which was set to 320 and cutoff frequencies, the filter was designed to be as narrow as possible, where the bandwidth of each filter was set to 20/(Fs/2) where Fs is the sampling frequency, that means that the low cutoff frequency was set to smaller than the frequency component by 10, and the high cutoff frequency was set to larger than the frequency component by 10. Then the whole audio string was divided into 40 milliseconds segment as in the “Fourier Transform” part to pass each character in all eleven filters built earlier using filter() command. After that, the power for each filter was found by finding the amplitude using sum() command and squaring it, then highest four powers were taken and added to a new array to represent the frequency components of the character. The same procedure as “Fourier Transform” method was followed to recover the character corresponds to each four frequency components and the whole decoded string was printed on the screen.
VI.	RESULTS AND ANALYSIS
In the two parts, our system contains an actual verification system of the inputs to obtain real outputs based on what is required. In the first part, the outputs are inputs for the second part, and if the system reaches a state of accuracy, these outputs are the original inputs in the first part. and after evaluating each method separately, we found that Filter method gets the highest accuracy followed by Fourier Transform method. 
In order to know how good the systems built are, many and many strings were tested where every English character was covered, so we can claim that our decoder “especially the Filter” can detect any given string correctly.
For example, a string containing all alphabet characters in addition to the space character was encoded and decoded using both systems and the results are shown in the following figures.
 
Figure 2: Testing of Encoder system
 
Figure 3: Testing of Fourier Transform Decoder system
 
Figure 4: Testing of Filter Decoder system
We encountered some shortfalls, like in Fourier Transform method when finding the four peaks, sometimes unwanted peaks are obtained while the needed ones are hidden specifically when the encoded signal carried noise in the encoding process. Also, the system was slow and tedious to run and results to appear. 
VII.	DEVELOPMENT
     This system can be developed by using different techniques and more complicated ones such as pattern matching method, technologies involved include dynamic time warping (DTW), hidden Markov (HMM) and vector quantization (VQ). Phonetic pronunciation sounds are collected and pre-processed to meet the data stream requirements of speech recognition system. The feature data are extracted from the speech signal data stream, which are matched with the standard reference model. Results matched are then evaluated for the final output [3]. 
     The encoder system can be enhanced by minimizing the noise that the encoded signal carries so it can be a lot easier for the decoder to detect the correct string. Also, the system can handle only English alphabet characters in addition to the “space”, it can be improved by creating frequency components for all ASCII characters so the systems can encode and decode any string you can think of but the process of course will be very challenging.
     The filter encoder was built with order equals to 320 which is very high, so it may be possible to implement it in more efficient way with decreasing its order
VIII.	Conclusion
     The main operations of this project (English alphabet character voice-frequency encoder and decoder system) have included many concepts and basics of the DSP. The project has included dealing with filters and discrete Fourier transform as a main concept. And for sure many other concepts of DSP. Also, many MATLAB skills were gained after working on such a project. After finishing working on the project, very satisfying results were obtained. But still, many more developments and features can be added to the project. One of the great problem solving techniques we have learned is to divide the problem into phases in order to simplify solving it easily and simply. Also, gaining teamwork skill was enjoyable and empowering with the beautiful spirit that exists.

 


REFERENCES
[1]     https://www.mathworks.com/discovery/what-is-matlab.html
[2]     https://www.techtarget.com/searchnetworking/definition/encoding-and-decoding
[3]     Research and Realization of Intelligent English Phonetic Pronunciation Training System. Hong Zheng      








